The Gale-Shapley algorithm is remarkably robust to variations on
the Stable Matching Problem. So, if you’re faced with a new variation of the
problem and can’t find a counterexample to stability, it’s often a good idea to
check whether a direct adaptation of the G-S algorithm will in fact produce
stable matchings.
That turns out to be the case here. We will show that there is always a
stable matching, even in this more general model with forbidden pairs, and
we will do this by adapting the G-S algorithm. To do this, let’s consider why
the original G-S algorithm can’t be used directly. The difficulty, of course, is
that the G-S algorithm doesn’t know anything about forbidden pairs, and so
the condition in the While loop,
While there is a man m who is free and hasn’t proposed to
every woman ,Solved Exercises
won’t work: we don’t want m to propose to a woman w for which the pair
(m, w) is forbidden.
Thus, let’s consider a variation of the G-S algorithm in which we make
only one change: we modify the While loop to say,
While there is a man m who is free and hasn’t proposed to
every woman w for which (m, w) !∈ F.
Here is the algorithm in full.
Initially all m ∈ M and w ∈ W are free
While there is a man m who is free and hasn’t proposed to
every woman w for which (m, w) !∈ F
Choose such a man m
Let w be the highest-ranked woman in m ’s preference list
to which m has not yet proposed
If w is free then
(m, w) become engaged
Else w is currently engaged to m'
If w prefers m' to m then
m remains free
Else w prefers m to m'
(m, w) become engaged
m' becomes free
Endif
Endif
Endwhile
Return the set S of engaged pairs
We now prove that this yields a stable matching, under our new definition
of stability.
To begin with, facts (1.1), (1.2), and (1.3) from the text remain true (in
particular, the algorithm will terminate in at most n 2 iterations). Also, we
don’t have to worry about establishing that the resulting matching S is perfect
(indeed, it may not be). We also notice an additional pairs of facts. If m is
a man who is not part of a pair in S, then m must have proposed to every
nonforbidden woman; and if w is a woman who is not part of a pair in S, then
it must be that no man ever proposed to w.
Finally, we need only show
(1.9)
There is no instability with respect to the returned matching S.
2122
Chapter 1 Introduction: Some Representative Problems
Proof. Our general definition of instability has four parts: This means that we
have to make sure that none of the four bad things happens.
First, suppose there is an instability of type (i), consisting of pairs (m, w)
and (m' , w' ) in S with the property that (m, w' ) !∈ F, m prefers w' to w, and w'
prefers m to m' . It follows that m must have proposed to w' ; so w' rejected m,
and thus she prefers her final partner to m—a contradiction.
Next, suppose there is an instability of type (ii), consisting of a pair
(m, w) ∈ S, and a man m' , so that m' is not part of any pair in the matching,
(m' , w) !∈ F, and w prefers m' to m. Then m' must have proposed to w and
been rejected; again, it follows that w prefers her final partner to m' —a
contradiction.
Third, suppose there is an instability of type (iii), consisting of a pair
(m, w) ∈ S, and a woman w' , so that w' is not part of any pair in the matching,
(m, w' ) !∈ F, and m prefers w' to w. Then no man proposed to w' at all;
in particular, m never proposed to w' , and so he must prefer w to w' —a
contradiction.
Finally, suppose there is an instability of type (iv), consisting of a man
m and a woman w, neither of which is part of any pair in the matching,
so that (m, w) !∈ F. But for m to be single, he must have proposed to every
nonforbidden woman; in particular, he must have proposed to w, which means
she would no longer be single—a contradiction